
Barack Hussein Obama publicly took the oath of office for his second presidential term on Monday before a jubilant crowd of well-wishers, many of whom said they found special meaning in the swearing-in of an African American president on the holiday celebrating the legacy of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.

Because the Constitution mandates Jan. 20 as the inauguration date, Obama and Biden were officially sworn into office in private ceremonies Sunday. The public inaugural festivities, bathed in pomp and circumstance, offer them and the nation a chance to take stock, breathe deep and contemplate the promise and peril of the next four years.

“This generation of Americans has been tested by crises that steeled our resolve and proved our resilience,” Obama said in his inaugural address.  “A decade of war is now ending.  An economic recovery has begun.  America’s possibilities are limitless, for we possess all the qualities that this world without boundaries demands.”

(Watch live video with news and social updates from today’s events on The Grid. Updates also available on our Liveblog.)

Obama struck some notes of bipartisanship, as expected after a bruising campaign and bitter, polarizing debates over the fiscal cliff and the federal debt limit. But he also emphasized the liberal economic and social themes that were the hallmarks of his successful electoral effort.

‘We, the people, understand that our country cannot succeed when a shrinking few do very well and a growing many barely make it,” Obama said. “We are true to our creed when a little girl born into the bleakest poverty knows that she has the same chance to succeed as anybody else, because she is an American, she is free, and she is equal, not just in the eyes of God but also in our own.”

Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor administered the oath of office to Vice President Biden at 11:47 a.m. Obama took the oath, administered by Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., at 11:50 a.m.

Obama and his family attended services at St. John’s Episcopal Church in Lafayette Square before arriving at the Capitol and greeting a crowd of reporters and staff by the Senate entrance.

“I miss this place,” the former Illinois senator said.

The crowds were large but nowhere near as massive as they were four years ago, when Obama was first sworn in. As of 11 a.m., Metro said 308,000 riders had entered its rail system, about 60 percent of the number who had entered at the same time in 2009.

Police and National Guard officials said pedestrian traffic flowed throughout the morning without incident, although a few glitches at checkpoints and in some Metro stations were reported. Metro station parking facilities filled up throughout the morning, and some stations near the Mall were overflowing, even though federal workers and many others had the day off for the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday.

At 11:35 a.m., shortly after the ceremony began, U.S. Park Police said the area east of the Washington Monument was full and closed to additional visitors, who would have to gather further to the west.

After taking his oath, Obama gave a 19-minute address that, at times, had the itemized, agenda-setting feel of a State of the Union speech. It did not soar; it hurried — reflecting a president with a long agenda, and a short window left to make it happen.

Obama mentioned tax reform, Medicare, Social Security and Newtown, Conn., where December’s shooting rampage spurred Obama’s new push for stronger gun laws.

He also made a forceful pitch for action on climate change, a priority stymied by congressional opposition during Obama’s first term.

“We will respond to the threat of climate change, knowing that the failure to do so would betray our children and future generations,” Obama said. “Some may still deny the overwhelming judgment of science, but none can avoid the devastating impact of raging fires and crippling drought and more powerful storms.”

Obama also made a historic mention of gay rights: he apparently is the first president to ever utter the word “gay” in an inaugural address. In Obama’s list of key civil-rights turning points, there was “Selma,” for the march in Alabama in 1965. There was “Seneca Falls,” the town in New York where an 1848 convention helped launch the women’s rights movement. And then there was “Stonewall,” a reference to the 1969 Stonewall riots in New York City, considered the spark that created the modern gay-rights movement.

“Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law,” Obama said. “For if we are truly created equal, then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well.”

In his address, Obama also invoked a theme from his reelection campaign: that of patience exhausted. The president said the politically gridlocked capital — and, implicitly, the Republicans who have fought his ideas — was moving too slowly at an urgent moment.

“We cannot mistake absolutism for principle, or substitute spectacle for politics, or treat name-calling as reasoned debate,” Obama said. “We must act, knowing that our work will be imperfect.”

The president’s audience appeared smaller than in 2009, when a record crowd of perhaps 1.8 million people watched Obama take his oath. As of 6 p.m., Metro said 657,000 riders had entered its rail system, compared with 923,000 at the same time four years ago.

Still, the Mall was crowded with thousands upon thousands, waving flags and chanting “O-BAM-A.” At 11:35 a.m., shortly after the ceremony began, U.S. Park Police said the area east of the Washington Monument was full and closed to additional visitors, who would have to gather farther to the west.

Police and National Guard officials said pedestrian traffic flowed throughout the morning without incident, although a few glitches at checkpoints and in some Metro stations were reported.

Metro station parking facilities filled up throughout the morning, and some stations near the Mall were overflowing, even though federal workers and many others had the day off for the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday.

